Sir, you have done enough,
and have perform'd asaint-like sorrow:
no fault could youmake,
Which you have notredeem'd;
indeed, paid down morepenitence
than done trespass:
at the last,
Do as the heavens havedone, forget your evil;
With them forgiveyourself.
Whilst I remember her andher virtues,
I cannot forget myblemishes in them,
and so still think ofthe wrong I did myself;
which was so much,
That heirless it hath mademy kingdom
and destroy'd the sweet'stcompanion
that e'er manbred his hopes out of.
True, too true, my lord:
If, one by one, you weddedall the world,
Or from the all that aretook something good,
To make a perfect woman,
she you kill'd would beunparallel'd.
I think so. Kill'd!
She I kill'd! I did so:
but thou strikest mesorely, to say I did;
it is as bitter upon thytongue as in my thought:
now, good now,
Say so but seldom.
Not at all, good lady:
You might have spoken athousand things
that would have donethe time more benefit
and graced yourkindness better.
You are one of those wouldhave him wed again.
If you would not so,
You pity not the state,
nor the remembrance of hismost sovereign name;
consider little whatdangers,
by his highness'fail of issue,
May drop upon his kingdom
and devour incertainlookers on.
What were more holy
than to rejoice the formerqueen is well?
What holier than, forroyalty's repair,
For present comfort andfor future good,
To bless the bed ofmajesty again
with a sweetfellow to't?
There is none worthy,
Respecting her that'sgone.
Besides, the gods will
have fulfill'd theirsecret purposes;
For has not the divineApollo said,
Is't not the tenor of hisoracle,
That King Leontes shallnot have an heir
till hislost child be found?
which that it shall, isall as monstrous
to ourhuman reason
As my Antigonus to breakhis grave
and come againto me; who, on my life,
Did perish with theinfant.
'Tis your counsel my lord
should to the heavensbe contrary,
Oppose against theirwills.
Care not for issue;
The crown will find anheir:
great Alexander left histo the worthiest;
so his successor was liketo be the best.
Good Paulina,
Who hast the memory ofHermione,
I know, in honour,
O, that ever I had squaredme to thy counsel!
then, even now,
I might have look'd uponmy queen's full eyes,
Have taken treasure fromher lips--
And left them more richfor what they yielded.
Thou speak'st truth.
No more such wives;
therefore, no wife: oneworse,
And better used,
would make her sainted spiritagain possess her corpse,
and on this stage,
Where we're offenders now,appear soul-vex'd,
And begin, 'Why to me?'
Had she such power,
She had just cause.
She had; and would incenseme to murder her I married.
I should so.
Were I the ghost thatwalk'd,
I'ld bid you mark her eye,
and tell me for what dullpart in't you chose her;
then I'ld shriek, thateven your ears should rift
to hear me;
and the words thatfollow'd should be
'Remember mine.'
Stars, stars, And all eyeselse dead coals!
Fear thou no wife;
I'll have no wife,Paulina.
Will you swear never tomarry
but by my freeleave?
Never, Paulina; so beblest my spirit!
Then, good my lords, bearwitness to his oath.
You tempt him over-much.
Unless another,
As like Hermione as is herpicture,
Affront his eye.
Good madam,--
I have done.
Yet, if my lord willmarry,--if you will, sir,
No remedy, but you will,
--give me the office tochoose you a queen:
she shall not be so youngas was your former;
but she shall be such
as,walk'd your firstqueen's ghost,
it should take joy to seeher in your arms.
My true Paulina,
We shall not marry tillthou bid'st us.
That shall be when your firstqueen's again in breath;
Never till then.
One that gives out himselfPrince Florizel,
Son of Polixenes, with hisprincess,
she the fairest I have yetbeheld,
desires access to yourhigh presence.
What with him?
he comes not like to hisfather's greatness:
his approach, so out ofcircumstance and sudden,
tells us 'Tis not avisitation framed,
but forced by need andaccident. What train?
But few, and those butmean.
His princess, say you,with him?
Ay, the most peerlesspiece of earth, I think,
That e'er the sun shonebright on.
O Hermione,
As every present time dothboast itself
above abetter gone,
so must thy grave give wayto what's seen now!
Sir, you yourself havesaid and writ so,
but your writing now iscolder than that theme,
'She had not been, Nor wasnot to be equall'd;'
--thus your verse flow'dwith her beauty once:
'tis shrewdly ebb'd,
to say you have seena better.
Pardon, madam:
The one I have almostforgot,--your pardon,--
The other, when she hasobtain'd your eye,
Will have your tongue too.This is a creature,
Would she begin a sect,
might quench the zeal o fall professors else,
make proselytes of who shebut bid follow.
How! not women?
Women will love her,
that she is a woman moreworth than any man; men,
that she is the rarest ofall women.
Go, Cleomenes;
Yourself, assisted withyour honour'd friends,
Bring them to ourembracement.
Still, 'tis strange
He thus should steal uponus.
Had our prince,
Jewel of children, seenthis hour,
he had pair'd well withthis lord:
there was not full a monthbetween their births.
Prithee, no more; cease;
thou know'st he dies to meagain when talk'd of:
sure, When I shall seethis gentleman,
thy speeches will bring meto consider
that which mayunfurnish me of reason.
They are come.
Your mother was most trueto wedlock, prince;
For she did print yourroyal father off,
Conceiving you: were I buttwenty-one,
Your father's image is sohit in you,
His very air, that Ishould call you brother,
As I did him,
and speak ofsomething wildly by us
perform'd before.
Most dearly welcome!and your fair princess,
--goddess!--O,alas!
I lost a couple,
that 'twixt heaven andearth
might thus have stood
begetting wonder as you,gracious couple, do:
and then I lost--
All mine own folly--thesociety,
Amity too, of your bravefather, whom,
Though bearing misery,
I desire my life once moreto look on him.
By his command have I heretouch'd Sicilia
and from him give you allgreetings
that a king, at friend,
Can send his brother:
and, but infirmity whichwaits upon worn times
hath something seized hiswish'd ability,
he had himself the lands andwaters 'twixt your throne
and his measured to lookupon you; whom he loves--
He bade me say so--
more than all the sceptres
and those that bear themliving.
O my brother,
Good gentleman!
the wrongs I have done theestir afresh within me,
and these thy offices, Sorarely kind,
are as interpreters of mybehind-hand slackness.
Welcome hither, As is thespring to the earth.
And hath he too exposedthis paragon
to thefearful usage,
At least ungentle, of thedreadful Neptune,
To greet a man not worthher pains,
much less the adventure ofher person?
Good my lord,
She came from Libya.
Where the warlike Smalus,
That noble honour'd lord,is fear'd and loved?
Most royal sir, fromthence; from him,
whose daughter his tearsproclaim'd his,
parting with her: thence,
A prosperous south-windfriendly, we have cross'd,
To execute the charge myfather gave me
for visiting your highness:
my best train I have from yourSicilian shores dismiss'd;
Who for Bohemia bend,
to signify not only mysuccess in Libya, sir,
But my arrival
and my wife's in safetyhere where we are.
The blessed gods purge allinfection from our air
whilst you do climatehere!
You have a holy father, Agraceful gentleman;
against whose person,
So sacred as it is, I havedone sin:
For which the heavens,taking angry note,
Have left me issueless;and your father's blest,
As he from heaven meritsit,
with you worthy hisgoodness.
What might Ihave been,
Might I a son and daughternow have look'd on,
Such goodly things as you!
Most noble sir,
That which I shall reportwill bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh.Please you, great sir,
Bohemia greets you fromhimself by me;
Desires you to attach hisson, who has--
His dignity and duty bothcast off--
Fled from his father, fromhis hopes,
and with a shepherd'sdaughter.
Where's Bohemia? speak.
Here in your city; I nowcame from him:
I speak amazedly;
and it becomes my marveland my message.
To your court whiles he washastening, in the chase,
it seems, of this faircouple,
meets he on the way thefather of this seeming lady
and her brother,
having both their countryquitted with this young prince.
Camillo has betray'd me;
Whose honour and whosehonesty
till now enduredall weathers.
Lay't so to his charge:
He's with the king yourfather.
Who? Camillo?
Camillo, sir; I spake withhim;
who now has these poor menin question.
Never saw I wretches soquake: they kneel,
they kiss the earth;
Forswear themselves asoften as they speak:
Bohemia stops his ears,
and threatens them withdivers deaths in death.
O my poor father!
The heaven sets spies uponus,
will not have our contractcelebrated.
You are married?
We are not, sir, nor arewe like to be;
The stars, I see, willkiss the valleys first:
The odds for high andlow's alike.
My lord, Is this thedaughter of a king?
She is, when once she ismy wife.
That 'once' I see by yourgood father's speed
will come on very slowly.
I am sorry,
Most sorry, you have brokenfrom his liking
Where you were tied induty,
and as sorry your choiceis not so rich in worthas beauty,
That you might well enjoyher.
Dear, look up:
Though Fortune, visible anenemy,
Should chase us with myfather,
power no jot hath she tochange our loves.
Beseech you, sir, remembersince you owed no more
to time than I do now:
with thought of suchaffections,
Step forth mine advocate;at your request
my father will grantprecious things as trifles.
Would he do so, I'ld begyour precious mistress,
Which he counts but atrifle.
Sir, my liege,
Your eye hath too muchyouth in't:
not a month 'Fore yourqueen died,
she was more worth suchgazes
than what you look onnow.
I thought of her,
Even in these looks Imade.
But your petition is yetunanswer'd.
I will to your father:
your honour not o'erthrownby your desires,
I am friend to them andyou:
upon which errand I now gotoward him;
therefore follow me andmark what way I make:
come, good my lord.
Beseech you, sir, were youpresent at this relation?
I was by at the opening ofthe fardel,
heard the old shepherddeliver the manner
how he found it:
whereupon, after a littleamazedness,
we were all commanded outof the chamber;
only this methought Iheard the shepherd say,
he found the child.
I would most gladly knowthe issue of it.
I make a broken deliveryof the business;
but the changes I perceivedin the king and Camillo
were very notes ofadmiration:
they seemed almost, withstaring on one another,
to tear the cases of theireyes;
there was speech intheir dumbness,
language in their verygesture;
they looked as they hadheard of a world ransomed,
or one destroyed:
a notable passion ofwonder appeared in them;
but the wisest beholder,
that knew no more butseeing,
could not say if theimportance were joy or sorrow;
but in the extremity ofthe one, it must needs be.
Here comes a gentlemanthat haply knows more.
The news, Rogero?
Nothing but bonfires: theoracle is fulfilled;
the king's daughter isfound:
such a deal of wonder isbroken out within this hour
that ballad-makers cannotbe able to express it.
Here comes the LadyPaulina's steward:
he can deliver you more.How goes it now, sir?
this news which is calledtrue
is so like an old tale
that the verity of it isin strong suspicion:
has the king found hisheir?
Most true, if ever truth werepregnant by circumstance:
that which you hear you'llswear you see,
there issuch unity in the proofs.
The mantle of QueenHermione's,
her jewelabout the neck of it,
the letters of Antigonusfound with it
which theyknow to be his character,
the majesty of the creaturein resemblance of the mother,
the affection of nobleness
which nature shows aboveher breeding,
and many other evidencesproclaim her with all certainty
to be the king's daughter.
Did you see the meeting ofthe two kings?
No.
Then have you lost asight,
which was to be seen,
cannot be spoken of.
There might you have beheldone joy crown another,
so and in such manner thatit seemed sorrow
wept totake leave of them,
for their joy waded intears.
There was castingup of eyes,
holding up of hands,
with countenances of suchdistraction
that they wereto be known by garment,
not by favour.
Our king, being ready toleap out of himself
for joy of hisfound daughter,
as if that joy were nowbecome a loss,
cries 'O, thy mother, thymother!'
then asks Bohemiaforgiveness;
then embraceshis son-in-law;
then again worries he hisdaughter with clipping her;
now he thanks the oldshepherd,
which stands by like aweather-bitten conduit
of many kings' reigns.
I never heard of suchanother encounter,
which lames report tofollow it
and undoesdescription to do it.
What, pray you, became ofAntigonus,
that carriedhence the child?
Like an old tale still,
which will have matter torehearse,
though credit be asleepand not an ear open.
He was torn to pieces witha bear:
this avouches theshepherd's son;
who has not only hisinnocence,
which seemsmuch, to justify him,
but a handkerchief andrings
of his that Paulinaknows.
What became of his barkand his followers?
Wrecked the same instantof their master's death
and in the view of theshepherd:
so that all theinstruments
which aided toexpose the child
were even then lost whenit was found.
But O, the noble combatthat 'twixt joy and sorrow
was fought in Paulina!
She had one eye declined
for the loss of herhusband,
another elevated that theoracle was fulfilled:
she lifted the princessfrom the earth,
and solocks her in embracing,
as if she would pinher to her heart
that she might no morebe in danger of losing.
The dignity of this actwas worth the audience
of kings and princes; forby such was it acted.
One of the prettiesttouches of all
and that which angledfor mine eyes,
caught the water thoughnot the fish, was when,
at the relation of thequeen's death,
with the manner how she cameto't bravely confessed
and lamented by the king,
how attentivenesswounded his daughter;
till, from one sign ofdolour to another, she did,
with an 'Alas,'
I would fain say, bleedtears,
for I am sure my heartwept blood.
Who was most marble therechanged colour;
someswooned, all sorrowed:
if all the world couldhave seen 't,
the woe hadbeen universal.
Are they returned to thecourt?
No: the princess hearingof her mother's statue,
which is in the keeping ofPaulina,
--a piece many years in doingand now newly performed
by that rareItalian master,
Julio Romano, who, had hehimself eternity
and couldput breath into his work,
would beguile Nature ofher custom,
so perfectly he is herape:
he so near to Hermionehath done Hermione
that they say one wouldspeak to her
and stand inhope of answer:
thither with allgreediness of affection
are they gone,
and there they intend tosup.
I thought she had somegreat matter there in hand;
for she hath privatelytwice or thrice a day,
ever since the death ofHermione,
visited that removedhouse.
Shall we thither and with ourcompany piece the rejoicing?
Who would be thence thathas the benefit of access?
every wink of an eye somenew grace will be born:
our absence makes usunthrifty to our knowledge.
Let's along.
Now, had I not the dash ofmy former life in me,
would preferment drop onmy head.
I brought the old man andhis son aboard the prince:
told him I heard them talk ofa fardel and I know not what:
but he at that time,overfond
of the shepherd'sdaughter,
so he then took her to be,
who began to be muchsea-sick,
and himself little better,
extremity of weathercontinuing,
this mystery remainedundiscovered.
But 'tis all one tome; for had I been
the finder out of this secret,
it would not have relishedamong my other discredits.
Here come those I have donegood to against my will,
and already appearing in theblossoms of their fortune.
Come, boy; I am past moechildren,
but thy sons and daughterswill be all gentlemen born.
You are well met, sir.
You denied to fight withme this other day,
becauseI was no gentleman born.
See you these clothes?
say you see them not
and think me stillno gentleman born:
you were best say theserobes
are not gentlemenborn:
give me the lie, do,
and try whether I am not nowa gentleman born.
I know you are now, sir, agentleman born.
Ay, and have been so anytime these four hours.
And so have I, boy.
So you have:
but I was a gentleman bornbefore my father;
for the king's son took meby the hand,
and called me brother;
and then the two kingscalled my father brother;
and then the prince my brother
and the princess my sistercalled my father father;
and so we wept, and there wasthe first gentleman-like tears
that ever we shed.
We may live, son, to shedmany more.
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck,
being in so preposterousestate as we are.
I humbly beseech you, sir,
to pardon me all thefaults I have committed
to your worship
and to give me your good report
to the prince my master.
Prithee, son, do; for wemust be gentle,
now we aregentlemen.
Thou wilt amend thy life?
Ay, an it like your goodworship.
Give me thy hand:
I will swear to theprince thou art
as honest a true fellowas any is in Bohemia.
You may say it,but not swear it.
Not swear it, now I am agentleman?
Let boors and franklinssay it, I'll swear it.
How if it be false, son?
If it be ne'er so false,
a true gentleman may swearit in the behalf of hisfriend:
and I'll swear to theprince thou art a tallfellow of thy hands
and that thou wilt not bedrunk;
but I know thou art notall fellow of thy hands
and that thou wilt bedrunk: but I'll swear it,
and I would thou wouldst bea tall fellow of thy hands.
I will prove so, sir, tomy power.
Ay, by any means prove atall fellow:
if I do not wonder how thoudarest venture to be drunk,
not being a tall fellow,trust me not.
Hark! the kings and theprinces, our kindred,
are going to see thequeen's picture.
Come, follow us: we'll bethy good masters.
O grave and good Paulina,the great comfort
That Ihave had of thee!
What, sovereign sir,
I did not well I meantwell.
All my services you havepaid home:
but that you havevouchsafed,
With your crown'd brother
and these your contractedHeirs of your kingdoms,
my poor house to visit,
It is a surplus of yourgrace,
which never my life maylast to answer.
O Paulina,
We honour you withtrouble:
but we came to see thestatue of our queen:
your gallery have wepass'd through,
not without much contentin many singularities;
but we saw not that which mydaughter came to look upon,
The statue of her mother.
As she lived peerless,
So her dead likeness, I dowell believe,
Excels whatever yet youlook'd upon
Or hand of man hath done;
therefore I keep itlonely, apart.
But here it is:
prepare to seethe life
as lively mock'd as everstill sleep mock'd death:
behold, and say 'tis well.
I like your silence,
it the more shows off yourwonder: but yet speak;
first, you, my liege,
Comes it not somethingnear?
Her natural posture!
Chide me, dear stone,
that I may say indeed thouart Hermione; or rather,
thou art she in thy notchiding,
for she was as tender asinfancy and grace.
But yet, Paulina, Hermionewas not so much wrinkled,
nothing so aged as thisseems.
O, not by much.
So much the more ourcarver's excellence;
Which lets go by somesixteen years
and makesher as she lived now.
As now she might havedone,
So much to my goodcomfort,
as it is now piercing tomy soul.
O, thus she stood, evenwith such life of majesty,
warm life,
As now it coldly stands,when first I woo'd her!
I am ashamed:
does not the stone rebukeme
for being more stonethan it?
O royal piece, there'smagic in thy majesty,
which has my evilsconjured to remembrance
and from thy admiringdaughter took the spirits,
Standing like stone withthee.
And give me leave,
And do not say 'tissuperstition,
that I kneel and thenimplore her blessing.
Lady, Dear queen, thatended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yoursto kiss.
O, patience!
The statue is but newlyfix'd, the colour's not dry.
My lord, your sorrow wastoo sore laid on,
Which sixteen winterscannot blow away,
So many summers dry;
scarce any joy did ever solong live;
no sorrow but kill'ditself much sooner.
Dear my brother,
Let him that was the causeof this have power
to take off so much grieffrom you
as he will pieceup in himself.
Indeed, my lord,
If I had thought the sight
of my poor image wouldthus have wrought you,
--for the stone is mine--
I'ld not have show'd it.
Do not draw the curtain.
No longer shall you gazeon't,
lest your fancy may thinkanon it moves.
Let be, let be.
Would I were dead, butthat,
methinks, already--
What was he that did makeit?
See, my lord,
Would you not deem itbreathed?
and that those veins didverily bear blood?
Masterly done:
The very life seems warmupon her lip.
The fixture of her eye hasmotion in't,
As we are mock'd with art.
I'll draw the curtain:
My lord's almost so fartransported
that he'llthink anon it lives.
O sweet Paulina,
Make me to think so twentyyears together!
No settled senses of theworld
can match thepleasure of that madness.
Let 't alone.
I am sorry, sir, I havethus far stirr'd you:
but I could afflict youfarther.
Do, Paulina;
For this affliction has ataste
as sweet as anycordial comfort.
Still, methinks, there isan air comes from her:
what fine chisel couldever yet cut breath?
Let no man mock me, for Iwill kiss her.
Good my lord, forbear:
The ruddiness upon her lipis wet;
You'll mar it if you kissit,
stain your own with oilypainting.
Shall I draw thecurtain?
No, not these twentyyears.
So long could I stand by,a looker on.
Either forbear,
Quit presently the chapel,
or resolve you for moreamazement.
If you can behold it, I'llmake the statue move indeed,
descend and take you bythe hand;
but then you'll think--Which I protest against--
I am assisted by wickedpowers.
What you can make her do
I am content to look on:what to speak,
I am content to hear;
for 'tis as easy to makeher speak as move.
It is required
You do awake your faith.
Then all stand still;
On: those that think it isunlawful business I amabout,
let them depart.
Proceed:
No foot shall stir.
Music, awake her; strike!
'Tis time; descend; bestone no more; approach;
Strike all that look uponwith marvel.
Come, I'll fill your graveup: stir, nay, come away,
Bequeath to death yournumbness,
for from him dear liferedeems you.
You perceive she stirs:
Start not; her actionsshall be holy
as you hearmy spell is lawful:
do not shun her until yousee her die again;
for then you kill herdouble.
Nay, present your hand:
When she was young youwoo'd her;
now in age is she becomethe suitor?
O, she's warm!
If this be magic, let itbe an art
Lawful as eating.
She embraces him.
She hangs about his neck:
If she pertain to life lether speak too.
Ay, and make't manifestwhere she has lived,
Or how stolen from thedead.
That she is living,
Were it but told you,
should be hooted at likean old tale:
but itappears she lives,
Though yet she speak not.Mark a little while.
Please you to interpose,fair madam:
kneel and pray yourmother's blessing.
Turn, good lady;
Our Perdita is found.
You gods, look down andfrom your sacred vials
pour your graces upon mydaughter's head!
Tell me, mine own.
Where hast thou beenpreserved?
where lived?
how found thy father'scourt?
for thou shalt hearthat I,
Knowing by Paulina
that the oracle gave hope thouwast in being,
have preserved myself tosee the issue.
There's time enough forthat;
Lest they desire upon thispush
to trouble your joyswith like relation.
Go together, you preciouswinners all;
your exultation partake toevery one.
I, an old turtle,
will wing me to some wither'dbough and there
My mate, that's never tobe found again,
Lament till I am lost.
O, peace, Paulina!
Thou shouldst a husbandtake by my consent,
As I by thine a wife: thisis a match,
And made between's byvows.
Thou hast foundmine;
But how, is to bequestion'd; for I saw her,
As I thought, dead,
and have in vain said manya prayer upon her grave.
I'll not seek far--
For him, I partly know hismind
--to find thee Anhonourable husband.
Come, Camillo, and takeher by the hand,
whose worth and honesty isrichly noted
and here justified
By us, a pair of kings.
Let's from this place.
What! look upon mybrother:
both your pardons,
that e'er I put betweenyour holy
looks my illsuspicion.
This is your son-in-law,
And son unto the king,who,
heavens directing,
Is troth-plight to yourdaughter.
Good Paulina, lead us fromhence,
where we may leisurelyeach one
demand an answerto his part
Perform'd in thiswide gap of time
since first we were dissever'd:hastily lead away.